We're good. Yeah.
Just out here. Yep.
Hey, Brie. We just, made a motion to move up, item number six,
to item number two because we have some distinguished guests here tonight to make a presentation.
As long as you're okay with that, we're gonna do that.
Sounds good.
Thanks, Briggs. Okay. Taylor,
>> take it away. I do have a celebration celebration today. In fact, I have a lot of celebrations,
and I decided it would be much better to invite them here in person rather than just tell you about them. Mhmm. So tonight, I'm excited to introduce you to miss Lionberger class.
These are our distinguished kindergartners,
as you mentioned,
and they have been working hard all year on reading. Right? They're learning to read. They're reading lots of books. They're learning letters and sounds.
And one of the programs they participate in is called Eggerid. And you might have heard me use that, term before. It's one of our literacy components, and it's part of the waiver,
part of the new literacy program that was approved by the state. We had piloted last year in first grade,
and just this year, really started to explore in kindergarten.
Heggerty,
talks about phonemic awareness. So that's the building blocks to phonics. So that's how student,
can separate and manipulate sounds. So when you think of cat, cat, act, which they'll demonstrate way better than I will,
talks about manipulating sounds, and they need those skills in order to, course, become effective readers.
So this is daily systematic instruction that they get between eight and fifteen minutes a day. It's not a long time, but it's systematic. It's consistent,
and, we're excited about all of the progress and growth that these guys have shown. So without further ado, I would ask miss Limeberger's class to come join us.
>> Okay.
Alright. We're gonna we're gonna
gonna warm up. Yeah. I'll put that for you. That's what you want. Okay. Okay.
>> Now some use the hand motion. They don't have to.
>> They don't have to if they don't want to. We're just gonna do a little bit of a long first. Okay? You guys ready? So Alright. What letter is this? G. What sound does it make? What
letter is this? M. What sound does it make?
What letter is this? G. What sound does it make? What
letter is this? What
sound does it make? O.
What letter is this? S.
Sound does it makes?
Okay. You guys ready for heavy? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Alright.
So
alright. Alright.
What rhymes
with
of,
Sage?
Dub,
sub,
tub,
Rub,
mub.
cup. Go ahead. We had some nonsense words. We had some real words. Great job. Alright. Now we're gonna do our onset onset
fluency. Right? The first sound we hear.
You see yourself.
Alright. So I'm gonna say the word, you're gonna say the word, and then you're gonna say the first sound you hear. You ready?
Bandage.
Quickly.
Quack. Quack. Quack. Ignore.
Ignore.
Avenue.
Nice job. Alright. Now we're gonna blend our phonemes together. We're gonna put the sounds together. Are you ready?
Good job. Alright. Get
Fun.
Now we're gonna segment our phonemes. We're gonna break it apart. Ready? I say the word, you say the word, and we're gonna break it. Jet. Jet. Jet.
Sub.
Sub. Sub.
Lock.
Good job. Alright. We're gonna add phonemes. The beginning, I have
Oct and d. Doc.
>> Id add.
P.
Ub add.
Rub and am add.
J m. Alright.
Now we're deleting from the beginning. Tap without.
Win
without.
Fox without.
Men without.
Not
without.
Right.
The hard one. Ready? You wanna challenge? Yeah. Here we go. Alright. Change
to g. Yes.
Run, change to
Son.
To p. Pop.
Hit, change to p.
Hit. Yes.
Change. Yep. To d. Yes.
Alright. Before our Hagerty high five, we're gonna start our hey diddle diddle, but I'm gonna stop you. K? And then think the rest in your head. You ready?
Hey, little, little. The cat and the fiddle. The cow jumped over them.
Everybody high five. Think it in your head.
K. If you know the rest, you can say it as you go to your seat. Okay?
You so much.
>> You do. Now jump over the moon. Right? You're not gonna do it. Thank
>> you.
So you can see what rock stars we have in kindergarten.
So if I can get a stack on there we go.
And like I said, it's eight to twelve minutes a day. It's a fourth, like we talk about, our developmentally appropriate planning based instruction,
but also gives them that systematic phonics and awareness.
So thank you so much to our kindergarten friends for joining us.
I love the machines out there. We're excited about that. So certainly, families, well, we always welcome you to stay for our board meetings. You may
have other other things you want to So thank you so much for joining
That's awesome.
Sorry if I'm making everyone on Zoom dizzy.
>> Hey.
Thank you. Thank you, Thank you. Alright.
Alright. So let's do Yeah.
We'll do comments from the from the public.
But Jenny Morell?
I'm
all set. Thank you.
How about Jenna Goldrick?
I
>> am also all set. Thank you. Melissa,
Going once, Melissa, Leteska.
Well, we'll come back. Laurie, I'm no comment. All set. Thank you. Thanks, Melissa. Thanks.
>> Okay.
Did everybody get a chance to take a look at the minutes from March I'm
sorry. Communications. Does anybody have any communications?
No? None? Okay.
Approval of the minutes from our regular meeting of March 13. Did everybody have a chance to take a look at those?
I did. She did. You do approve.
Thank you, Steve.
>> One second. Caitlin's second? I just found another a couple of changes. They're very picky. Oh, okay.
Terry was here in person, not virtual, last month. Yeah. I'm pretty sure.
And we also had Melissa Lateska and Christina Fraser who were here as teachers
in the room, honestly, not virtual. They were here for the presentation last month. Okay.
>> That's all we've found. Alright. Thank you, Shannon.
With those changes, can I get a second?
Kaitlyn seconds it. All in favor? One. Aye. Okay.
Aye.
Okay.
>> Again, second point with the language in the corrective action plan. We were able to find it out, and that
effective action plan that was that sent
on the next day by Eric to the.
And then we also discussed just disclosing monthly statements to the time treasurer.
Monthly statements to the the time treasurer,
general fund of expenditures to the time treasurer.
Our our monthly financials that we get sent in our board packet gets sent now to to show
we also talked about and came up with a plan to send overview monthly bank reconciliations.
We talked about just making sure the ZURAN reconciliation
is done by September 1,
>> of of what it is that we're doing here, the grants, things like that. So I definitely feel we're moving in the right direction when it comes to that.
Some of these people from the audience need them. Was open to everybody? It was not open to everybody. It was open to the chair and the board chairs.
And Jeff McGuire had asked Paula King to come because Jeff Murray was unavailable to attend. Did Steve, did you run? I was unable to. He was unable to attend. I was asked to attend, but Yep. So he was replaced by one of us. No. He was not.
>> So yep. Go ahead. Sorry. Is forty five days enough time? Yes. Yes. Yes. Okay. Yep. Yep. And we had talked about it in the meeting. And and and I just heard no. Perry's going back to me. Both a little bit, but forty five days is plenty.
>> Yeah. Yep. So
so that is all I have for for my chairperson
oral report.
Val, take it away.
>> Alright.
Let me see.
So,
we've been talking about those IAQ reports that I have to do for the new, state mandate for the 01/01/2024
reporting.
Steve and I had talked about this with liaisons last month.
There's six reports.
The first one is fully complete.
And if it's not on the website as of today, it will be because our tech person has it to put on the website.
It is the first one to be finished was the food service,
checklist.
That one involved us making sure that not only, walking through everything was okay, but also making
sure that there's no gas leaks with our,
equipment.
So Uncas was here.
When Uncas was here, we did also find out that the propane tanks that were out back were expired.
So they credited us the propane that was in there and gave us some new propane tanks because because we leased them anyways.
So that one's all set.
And
everything else that needed to be done,
for the one for the kitchen's fine. I signed off on it, but then I also had Beth Pratt sign off on it.
She is the person that oversees our kitchen for Coventry Foodservice.
And so that one, like I said, if it's not up already, there's a separate section,
that will,
have, well, six of the reports when they're done and signed off on.
And I'm working on the finishing the waste management and the pest,
and then there'll be three more after that. Waste management and the pest control should be done, in the next two weeks.
There's just a couple of things on there that I need to, make sure that I have,
correct in terms of our schedule
and,
making sure that,
we have, set up for the rest of this year,
our timeline
with pest management,
and waste management. And then once I put that on there, I'll post that one.
So that's IAQ,
and that's what it'll say on there is IAQ compliance.
Had not posted a superintendent
updates
that I get for superintendents' corner in a while. So there was one in last Friday's
River East, and we were able to kinda showcase what's been going on this year in addition to some of the kids from the invention convention as well as the spelling bee.
So that was nice. I'm sure they'll, like, see their little names in there.
In terms of where we are now, this kinda becomes the crazy time of the rest of the year with us making sure that, you know, as we know, it's we're almost almost already to the end here for teachers anyways and for the rest of the staff for the school year. So
as everybody knows, unfortunately,
our after school grant dries up, at the end of this year.
So we are planning it is
it's we are able to plan events as long as they're done, paid for, and everything prior to the end of the year that go through the summer. So I've been working with the library. There's gonna be a couple of summer family events at the library that they normally do anyways,
which will now just be sponsored by AES
after school grant.
So, we've already gotten the invoices from them, which is good.
And those will be open to, obviously, the general Andover public there, but it's geared towards summer reading with kids.
So that'll be good.
Working with the community garden,
because that's another town
community program that we can have our children work with. So between now and the end of the year, that garden that's moved back there that, was originally there, and now they had to move it over because of the new building.
Jeff Ballard is the person that we're working with, and I know that, Nick Eckert had offered to assist him because he's his neighbor.
And the two of them and our staff then will work too. We've already gotten the invoice,
to put through the after school grant for the fencing for that. So our kids will assist
with that, and they will, make the sign for the door of the shed,
artistically and the,
garden itself because the one that was out there, I guess, they said didn't hold up too well. So our kids will take care of that in our after school program.
And we also are gonna see if the museum wants to do one more because we did a lot with the hundred and seventy fifth last year with that grant. So we'll see if the,
museum wants to do, another event between either now and the end of the year or into the early summer.
So I'm waiting to hear from them on that one. And then, sadly, that one will be over.
So as you know, we talked last time, about the,
the
expansion Mike mentioned last time when we're talking about the liaison report then what we were doing with the rest of that as for 2021 reading,
and literacy money.
There's two things I had mentioned to you that we were still going to be, waiting for. One of it, we still have not made a decision yet. I'm working with Melissa Litaska on the seating,
over there, child seating,
as, you know, next year, we're gonna have a ton of of littles, and there's really no pace place for the littles in here to sit and read,
especially with an adult,
that will be sitting and working with them. So they had approved that,
in the grant, and so we're waiting for that. And then the last thing in that section that went with, reading family engagement and,
to work with our diverse learners,
had to do with the signs that when the meeting's over, if you look out into the hallway, you'll see there's now signs on the outside of each of the doors that identify the rooms. They're large. They're large lettered.
And so we do have, as some of you know, we do have, a couple of kids in our building that are actually legally blind or
extremely visually impaired.
So, that was part of the reason why I believe this got approved because that assists those children.
It assists some of our other kids who just like as they're walking by to know which room it is they're going in. And post COVID now, we're lucky that we have parent volunteers, again, and community volunteers.
So in addition to first responders who would normally then be the people we'd be concerned with identifying
rooms
from the inside, it's,
you know, it's easy for everybody to identify. And quite honestly, they're cute too. So that adds to it, and it adds a little sparkle to the hallway. So most of them have gone up. There's a couple
excuse me. There's a couple be because this had to be paid for out of this grant,
and, we weren't quite sure if they would be in in early May or late April.
We made the decision if we knew, for example, that one room was gonna be called something else different next year because we were moving them, we moved that sign. So, like, you'll see a a Christina Fraser sign outside, and, you'll see a Caraboni sign. They won't necessarily both be there. One sign can be picked up and moved to another room. And all of the letters
that are on the signs are those
Vinyl. Vinyl letters, so they can be replaced if need be as well. So so make sure you take a peek. They're they're pretty, and, you know, we're very grateful to
that grant source for that.
We also just ordered today the right to read, curriculum.
As Taylor told you last month, we chose bookworms
as that science of reading, one that you had to choose off the list.
And because our waiver,
also included Hegarty, which you just saw an example of,
in use as well as foundations,
all of those are approved to go through that right to read grant.
And so, that was good because
we wouldn't have put that through
the two the three together are $50,000,
and that is what the grants that there were two separate grants. One was small town right to read and one was right to read, and the two of them together are $50,000.
So, you know, at least we knew what we had to spend there, which is great.
And, again, we didn't have that before, bookworms,
so that isn't something that existed, budgetarily speaking. It was a new addition. We knew we had the money, we didn't put it in this year's budget either because we knew we had a funding source. So that one will be completely paid for k three, which is what science reading is,
for book works.
We did receive the, paraprofessional,
as I mentioned,
the training grants for 5,000.
We will hopefully be meeting with paraprofessionals
next week and getting their input
on,
I think, Wednesday,
on what sort of things they would like to do because it could be personalized
to
the paraprofessional's
position. So, of course, we have PMT training that everybody gets that'll go through there for paraprofessionals,
CPR that'll go through there, but that is enough money for if there is a paraprofessional that works with a child with autism or preschool or something like that. There will be enough in there for them to be able to,
say, this is what I'd like to do, and it will allow reimbursement for their time as well. So we do know one para that's already asked about doing something over the summer, but they would also then be reimbursed for their time.
In terms of
staffing,
we
will have a speech language position
for the fall
that we'll be posting.
We anticipate
a custodial
position.
We have had a verbal confirmation,
that somebody's probably gonna be retiring this year. So if we start to see
things posted, those would be posted.
And,
definitely interviewing,
for a preschool position because one of our current preschool teachers will, be moving to one of our upper grades with the retirement of a teacher next year. So, if you see those posted, you'll know exactly why they're getting posted.
And,
that's really it unless anybody has any other questions.
Just on
>> the bookworm saying, I'm pretty trying to remember. I know there was a state requirement or something for curriculum. Does this fulfill that? Meaning that's what's gonna cover that state? Because with that mandate for science of reading, they gave you a list and said these are approved programs. If you do not have one of those approved programs, you can put in a waiver.
We put that waiver in, and we said this is our homegrown program, which also includes foundations and Hegarty,
and they either approve it or they don't. We came back with a transitional approval, a conditional approval,
and it said you do have to choose one of the ones from that list for your primary, but you can keep foundations and you can keep Hegarty. So when we looked at that list then, she had interreading. She had bookworms.
She had wonders.
There were a bunch of possibilities,
and that committee did a very good job, with Taylor of kinda going around and taking a look. They said Hebron doing bookworm. Gonna do Barbara. Yeah. As well. Yeah. They just committed books to to bookworms? Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's how how many years gram are using. Yeah. How many years is that for? It goes up to third grade anyways.
>> But in terms of being the curriculum that you're using for that mandate. What yeah. What we purchase isn't we don't there's not a lot of reusables, if that's what you mean. So we didn't have to do, like, a three year or a five year. We didn't have to do that type of purchase.
Most of what they'll use is is reusable. I'm sorry. I meant to say not consumable.
>> Okay. Not reusable. K. Yes. I gotcha. I was like, so it's 50,000 every year? No. I you're on there. It's my fault. Don't
>> give all heart attack. No. I knew that. Yes. It is not consumable.
Okay. The majority of it is reeds.
>> So at this point, we need all the mandate and moving forward, so we're good on the bridge. So I I And the reed and like Steve said, the other towns. You know? So Yeah. Was very excited to finally I was, like, waiting on Hebron. Like, come on. Make the right choice. Yeah. Because Harbaugh had it first. Right. They went and visited it. That's right. And so we opted for it, not just because they had it, because they they liked it. Yep. Yep. Yep. And then Hebron had made that decision too. So it's fantastic that k three in all three towns, the feeder Yeah. That'll be great. Will have the same one. Good. Awesome. Nice one.
>> Does anybody have any questions for
Val? Brie, I'll start with you because you're online. Do you have any questions for Val on her report?
No questions.
I
guess we should. Okay.
>> Alright.
Thank you. Anybody here? Does anybody have any questions for Val? No? Okay. Thank
you, Val. Appreciate it.
>> Taylor.
Alright.
So
we have a couple
well, like Val said, it's the end of the year, so it goes fast. So there's a lot coming up in terms of dates and things to know. PTA is very busy, so they have a talent show coming up as well as a pasta dinner next week. So that's exciting.
So two events on the horizon there. We'll also have our evening of the arts on May 23,
which has our art show at it as well as our
spring concert and
our
book fair. So all those will happen. PTA will have a table, and we're also gonna have Christy Hazen,
to do a science kinda have a science table as well. I think there's a snake coming, so prepare your eyes.
So that's exciting. So that will be on the twenty third.
No school course Memorial Day. And then for your note, we'll be in June.
So sixth grade step up. I know I shared that date with the board before, but I did just put it on here for you. The eleventh and the thirteenth will be that last day of school for the two snow days that we're making up right there. Right.
SBAC testing
will begin May 7, the week of May 7, so that's coming up quickly as well. That's for third through sixth grade.
It takes about initially, about two weeks is the and then, of course, any students who are absent or need to make up or have extended time. So puts us right about to the end of May. The window closes on the last May 30. So,
that will be great. We'll get that,
started.
And then I had our NIAC window for accreditation opens May 1, but just
one hour ago right before the meeting, I got our actual
fifteen day notice for May 6 to May 24. So it could have gone all the way to Halloween. I don't That's good. That is good. Yeah. So we You guys are all Great. So I am very excited. I'm I'm, like Five six to what? Five twenty four. Five twenty four. Then you get, like, a forty eight hour? Yeah. So first, it's a fifteen day. So now we'll go into, like, making sure everything is Right. Perfection
as it always is. Think it was gonna happen. I was like, no. It's gonna be September. It's gonna be September.
But that's exciting. So teachers are already I already texted them. They're already like, okay. I'm gonna do this, this, and this. So we're we'll be we'll be good, and, hopefully, we'll have good news to share then at the May board meeting with them. And
then our last PD day we just had, CEA came, and they delivered some professional development around integrating play based practices that was new in upper grades. New legislation. While certainly we are, I always say, ahead of the curve in our pre K, K, the legislation now, kind of provides that allowance for developmentally
appropriate play in first through fifth grade. So that was a nice opportunity as well. That's great. And then, as we talked about bookworms,
certainly,
we are put that order in. The professional development piece will already begin a little bit this year just to get teachers acclimated.
We have the best teachers on earth, so several of them have already started piloting just using online resources. Like, they're, you know, just jumping in so that next year they can really get their
minds around it and be ready to go. So we'll start that work this year and, of course, carry into next year.
And then I know later on the agenda is talking about the additional preschool classroom. So I just thought I would share with the board some information on that, on registrations and things so that you can use that as you have that discussion.
So as of today,
we have 54 registered students for next school year. So currently,
of those 54 students,
we have six,
staff related kiddos. So some of those are out of town, but staff related.
And then about
nine
other out of town students. So just so you have that kind of of the 54.
And those towns, as you, can imagine, are what you'd expect with four from Hebron,
two in Bolton, two Coventry, one Marlborough, and one Columbia.
So that's kind of what what we expect in terms of the surrounding towns. In addition to the 54 registered,
I have
probably between five to 10 open inquiries.
So with four classrooms,
the max we could take would be 60.
That puts us at 15 a room. We talked about,
back in November when we had to open the additional classroom.
While we can take 17,
we have to be mindful of any move ins or birth to three students who are required to serve. So starting with that max doesn't allow for that. So 15, really, that 60 would fill four classrooms.
As of right now, I mean, I know you're gonna talk and make a decision. Even with our 54, we're past three classrooms.
That would put us you know, 45 would be three full classrooms. So,
I I anticipate
with no problem that we're gonna hit that 60.
I'm I'm being very mindful and letting people who are open inquiries know that
the spots are limited and and, you know, we're we're time stamping and dating just so we can make those decisions as the board decides and as we as we move forward in, that enrollment piece. But, you know, it's very exciting. We even our out of towner,
out of town residents, out of town, applicants often have heard about us from an out of town student who's here or an Andover family.
And, really, I just did a tour this morning,
and they were just from
Marlborough. Marlborough. Right? Marlborough, and they just could not believe that this you know, our small town had such a
amazing program and and that they were, you know, certainly a little sad to not have that opportunity in their own town, but certainly
being in the the Tri Region was exciting.
>> Are the nine out of towners that you included in the 54, are those kids that are already currently here?
Or
>> Some are. Some aren't.
But they're ones that you've already said will have spot? They're already registered. Out of town, we typically wait till about May 15, especially here because we aren't you know, I'm not sure until the board decides how many sections. They know that they out of town doesn't get that guarantee till typically mid May. Okay. But because we are not we don't do a lottery, it is time stamped. They know where they are in the queue. So they know should that there be that fourth classroom that they would have that spot. Okay. But, yes, a couple of the out of town students who are already enrolled would go in front of a new out of town student, if that makes sense. Yeah. Exactly. They're always if on the wait list was an Andover kid, they're gonna get bumped up. Correct. An Andover kid has Correct. And all the out of town students
are pay full price cards. Full tuition.
Yeah. Certainly. And then and then their school readiness, our our grant guidelines
outlines how many students in different income brackets and different, you know, things that we need. So we can utilize
out of town students should we need to.
Alright. If there's any additional information that would help you there, but it's exciting.
And kindergarten
registration as well is is in full swing, so those are obviously Andover residents. Do you know where we're at on that?
I think we are sitting around 20,
give or take. Usually, kindergarten's a little bit I wanna say slower. It is. I don't know why families it's not the same urgency because they know they have a spot, so to speak. But this would be the smaller year, right, because of the change in the cutoff? So, actually, 20, I was I was happy to be 20 already. You know? It's
hard to say in the next couple months in terms of are their families waiting? Are they thinking about the waiver process? Are they not? You know? So in terms of if they're not in our preschool right now, we could see that number both a little bit. And so just because I saw the message, so I just wanna put it on the minutes here. Did I saw you send something out soliciting information, like request from parents or whatnot, and then also pointing out there will not be a combined classroom classroom. Sure. Yes. So we do not anticipate a combined classroom just with the elementary numbers. It makes sense we'll have the two sections as we Sorry. Sorry about that. No. No. No. Something just happened. I know. Marie's having some
>> connection issues, so she may be on and off. But Just trying again? Okay. Yeah. Okay.
She's
>> back. We anticipate two two seconds, two thirds as we typically would. And then do you anticipate still having the the structure for four, five, six with the separate
>> Yes. So kind of homeroom and Yep. So we're doing that planning process now. We anticipate the teachers will remain in their current sections in terms of I teach sixth grade ELA or fifth.
We will keep the enrichment, but in fourth grade, we're gonna add without the combo, it frees us up a little bit. Now missus Fraser will be able to do a fourth grade section of math,
which will help that class size as well, get those two more
smaller math sessions,
>> and missus Caraboni will support their ELA as well. But curriculum wise, I think I think that's been, like, the most wonderful thing that you have added.
>> We've gotten a lot of positive feedback and really from the students as well, which is exciting.
>> You know, at this age, sometimes you hear more from the parents, but even the students, I think, felt Cool. I can either ask it now or wait until the other, but, you you kind of alluded to a couple of them. So we're anticipating,
obviously, pre k, we're gonna discuss 2K
Yep. 21.
What?
>> 22K,
21, 22, and 23, and then And then 111. 56. Okay.
The fall? Yes. Yep. Okay. Yep.
To determined. To be determined.
Thank you. Yes. Absolutely.
>> Brie, do you have any questions for Taylor on her report?
No.
>> We'll
try. Yep. Brie, for whatever reason, we can't hear you. I'm gonna assume that you said no, but we're we're not able to to hear you. But
does anybody here have any questions for for Taylor? I'm sure if we have questions when we get to that
>> preschool classroom. But does anyone have a yep. There's another upcoming date that's not on here. There is a jazz concert next Thursday night as well
that a lot of our students will be participating in. Yeah. And there were three students in sixth grade that did participate at the state level, two singing and one instrumental.
Yep. And that was, what, two two Thursday and Friday? Yes. Okay.
>> Last week? Week before vacation. Before vacation. Vacation feels like a mile. You know? I mean, we're center. Yeah. I have multiple grades there. And we
moved the pasta dinner time up a little as well. We did. So that's knowing that, we thought some there was quite a few families staying for after school that day, so we also started at four four or 04:30. 04:30. 04:30. We'll make it available if you would like to take it to go. That way we figured if families wanted to participate Yep. Get a bite to eat before the concert, they could. And we're gonna have it to go.
>> So Good. Yes.
Alright. Anybody else have any questions for for Taylor?
>> No? We're good? Okay.
Terry,
you're up. Okay.
In your packet, you'll see the financials
as of April 2.
If
anybody's had a chance to go through them, if they have any questions, now's the time to ask
because we do have a budget transfer.
Or is that in this section?
>> Yes. Later. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Alright. Okay. Scratch that. That's
fine. You wanna let's go back. That we move item
e to,
I guess,
7E1.
D one. D one. Sure. So
>> it makes sense to do the financial report. Might as well just transfer now. Yep. That makes sense. So does anybody have any questions on the expenditure reports that are included in the packet?
I think they're pretty straightforward.
Okay. So the the the item that was just moved up was the budget transfer request,
which we we are putting before the board for their approval.
And I did,
I did send it out to everybody today. If you don't have a copy, that's alright. We're gonna
just talk about it. Oh, on your email. It's in the email. In an email. So, basically,
we're requesting
to transfer
funds from our lunch program, other professional services to our admin tech repair and maintenance. We're looking for $9,000
to be transferred.
These funds are needed for, additional tech repair and maintenance such as our website
upkeep. And then we we
just had a,
surge protector, I believe, go
Battery. A battery, a surge protector for the server room. So we do have
some anticipated
>> expenses that are gonna need to be paid for. So
>> how do we end up with $9,000 extra in the month of? So, actually, there's probably more than that.
>> And next month, you can move that. We
are finishing up with
the
remember during COVID, right after COVID Yeah. There was that extra government money that was given, and we're very lucky to have Cottagee Food Service when it's ours. They leave it in our bucket.
We kept it in that bucket, and we're able to do you can do anything that needs to be done to the kitchen with it. So they had spent a little bit at one time when we bought the
the dedicated hot water heater for the kitchen,
and it was a small one for the kitchen. We hadn't used it since then.
They requested two other things.
Last year,
Beth Pratt replaced because of new legislation that was gonna come up in terms of dishes
where they couldn't any longer use the Styrofoam,
boxes for moving forward. She, they did, put in,
the the dishwasher
with that, that little Leiche Hobart dishwasher.
And then now,
at the end of the year, you know, it needs to be gone. They give you a certain just like any other Leiche grants, they give you a time period.
And I spoke with Beth Pratt,
and I said to her, what is it that we still need in the kitchen that we could do with that money so it doesn't get passed along to the general fund in the future?
And there was
something with the stove, and there was something with the small refrigerator that was there. And after that, there is still money there. And
so she said,
you know, I'm 100%
sure at the end of the year, I will not need to touch that this year because of the carryover
from that.
And so
we said, okay. That's great. So she said we're good.
>> And there's nothing in the kitchen that's on its last leg or anything like that? Well, what we wanted to do is, you know, really wait
>> until May and
make sure right now they don't have anything pressing on their list. I just, as I said, did the food service checklist too so we know we're good there,
and just kind of kind of wait that one and see toward the end what she finds. But the big thing is,
this stove and
the, that little refrigerator.
And so if there isn't anything after that in May,
she'll be talking to you again about the rest of it. Okay.
Does anybody have any questions? Yeah. Sorry.
So you might questions?
Yes. Can you hear me?
>> I make a motion to move $9,000
from our lunch program and other professional services
to our admin tech repair needs.
Second.
All in favor?
Aye. Aye. And
>> then if we can make sure that a copy of this is added to the minutes so that they're in the record. Absolutely.
>> So so that that motion is moved seven zero zero. And if you can send this to the treasurer, this is one of the minutes too. Okay.
But, like, we agreed to that we would send the board Thank you. Board of ed approved transfers over to the treasurer. So that would be our first one. So
>> okay. Does anybody else have any questions? I'm sorry, Terry. Do you have anything, please? Well, I have one more thing because you guys asked that I give you an update each,
each meeting regarding,
the consultant that I'm working with. Yes. I did meet with her on March 19 from one to three. We discussed grants and bank reconciliations
and all that good stuff. And, I have been sending her reports for her review,
and she's been very good and very responsive.
And I'm feeling very confident about our about what we have right now. Great. Thanks, Terry. Thank for the update.
>> Appreciate that.
Now does anybody have any questions for Terry?
No? Okay. Alright. Thank you, Terry. Appreciate it.
Liaisons report.
Is there is there a school ready did you guys have a I know there are only ones up tomorrow. Okay. So there's no school. Is there a school readiness update or no? Because it's tomorrow? Okay. We'll be talking tomorrow,
>> we'll be
talking about the QE, which is the quality enhancement grant. We have to get permission. It's about $3,038.81.
Of course, you know, the exact $38.81
and probably some change. No
change. Change. And
>> so that's quality enhancement from school readiness. So that can be your program and your school readiness council decides what you're gonna spend that money on. So in years past, it's been professional development. Some, recently, it's been outdoor maintenance. So the, mulch under the preschool playground,
the sand It will be because they're coming. So that's what we're presenting tomorrow, and the council will vote to approve that, which we'll approve. So, Brie, will you be able to make that?
>> I am trying to make it worse. I can't hear.
>> No. What is can you hear me at all? Jenny asked if we could hear her. So she'll be on there. Yeah. Okay.
>> Okay. Thank you very much, Taylor.
The as far as the PTA, I know Taylor mentioned,
we are doing a pasta dinner fundraiser next Thursday.
We are gonna do it from 04:30 to seven,
and we will have the option available,
if you need to take it to go.
Tickets are,
$10
each.
But if you're staff,
seniors,
first responders, or military, it's $8
And,
again, it benefits the outdoor playground that we're raising money for.
We did do a little
fill in the thermometer a couple weeks ago. We are well on our way to reaching our goals. So,
again, it is open
>> town wide for everybody to come to the pasta dinner, so we're hoping that everybody comes. I apologize. Yep. Jenny actually said she could hear Brie. It might be us. Can you try again, Brie? I changed my speaker.
No. Oh.
>> No. I was trying to dial in. So Hold on one second. Yep. That's fine. Just don't want her to not be able to. Yep. So you can hear me now? Now? Can you hear us now? I can hear hearing anything. I know. Something is not You're muted.
>> If you go back to that, it had a I just didn't speak to Is there yeah. No. She just wrote a message. Everyone else like, the chats. Everyone else can hear her. You know? Hi. Is Jenny. Can you hear me? Yes. I can hear Okay. Brie. Brie, try again. Can you hear me? Hey. Hey. Okay.
>> I didn't know. I apologize. It must have been on my end when I first when I changed it. I'm so sorry, Brie. We
>> Brie, just backing up real quick. Will you be able to attend the school readiness meeting tomorrow?
>> I am trying to make it work with my schedule.
>> I am not 100 sure yet. Okay. Alright. Well, thank I appreciate it, Brie. Thank you. Okay.
That was my ramble on the pasta dinner, fundraiser. That's next Thursday. Again, it's open to everyone, so please join.
It's, again, we're raising money for that new playground.
Have you guys publicized it in town? It's gonna be in the River East to on Friday. Okay. Yes. Yep.
And we will have some great
raffle prizes. We've been kind of holding on to some of the bigger bigger ones that we have.
So we'll be selling raffle tickets
there. And then at evening of the arts, we're gonna sell raffle tickets, and I think we'll we'll be able to sell them
in the middle. Right? We talked about that, and I'll get you the list.
And then we'll pick names at evening of the art. So we've got two vouchers for plane tickets. We've got some sports memorabilia.
So
so
yes. So that's our next fundraiser, and then we've the town show coming up on May 29. We had to move the day, so that would be May 29.
Okay.
Go
ahead, sir. So facilities,
>> just number one, wanted to thank Val for coming in during spring break to help oversee the replacement of the bleachers,
and she served as kind of the liaison in there. If you haven't seen them, the plastic ones with all the holes, all they're gone. The seats. Yes. The seats are gone. The Excited. The bleachers have been updated, and it's been sanded. You can actually look underneath the bleachers, so that's good to go. I believe the bleachers of the sanding will occur over the summer, correct, where they'll stand there. And you you can see the different color. It's been a while. So it it's it'll it'll be that'll look nice. I
don't know where we stand on as far as some of the other improvements that the gym that the town was talking about, but, again, that's not on the town's end. But, you I know, did just wanna point out and say thank you for coming in because rather than have somebody else she took her time off and came in, sat, and helped oversee that. So thank you. Thanks, Val. Yep. When they moved to the bleachers because this is for the rep,
>> you know, commission.
Carol Lee was instrumental.
But when they moved the bleachers,
they were gonna just,
you know, put the bleachers back in place. And then when the floors were done over the summer, they were then gonna come move them again, and that was that didn't make sense. So they had decided that they would have the floor people would come sand it, put a light coat of something on there. Now if those bleachers are moved,
just so that you know, and Carol and I spoke about this, there is underneath
where the bleachers were one spot. We took pictures that I could put it in our file
so that in ten years, if somebody moves them and looks, they won't think it's, like, new damage to something. What happens to the floors, as the floor guy explained to me, is over time,
think about it kinda like, you know, they they move. Right? They move toward the edge, toward the to the edge of the wall. But because the edge of our walls has that plastic thing there, do you know what I mean, that goes around, like, for the wax space? Yeah. What
happens then is it starts to pop up or down.
In the case underneath there, it actually started to pop down.
And so you get to the end, and the best I could describe it in layman's terms, which because it helped me, was it's like when you have a tree on a sidewalk that starts to grow underneath it beneath it, and the sidewalk buckles up and maybe cracks, but it's sound. It's okay.
That's what it looks like under there. And so there isn't anything wrong with it. Foundationally,
it's fine, but that's there is a spot underneath there, and they originally thought maybe water damage or something. That's not what it was. It was from that You're running a contact. Right. Running it running against it and pushing against the wall. So so we have that for our files, and that way, you know, if anybody ever sees that in the future, they'll know. And the color of the floor is beautiful. It's very light wood. Yep. And it's very similar to the wooded,
>> top. Okay. So you can see what that blonde wood. We're just doing it over years and years, you know, on top of
they're that's what they're sanding it down and bringing. So the rest of the gym floor should match that. Right. And Mr. Monahan's working on,
>> with the the floor people on the floor design. Oh, nice. So Okay. Oh, it's perfect. Great. Awesome.
>> Does anybody else have any, other liaison reports?
Jerry and Mike, any curriculum?
Not putting anything up in there. No? Okay. How about you, Caitlin? Any communications or no? No. Shannon?
>> Yeah. Just to follow-up on your CIP. Yep. Just to tell people what happened at the meeting in addition to Celeste's presentation.
We heard from about a new town sign Yes. From the economic development committee.
So one is gonna be going in, and we discussed approving another sign to go in. Welcome to Andover signs. Yeah. And saw their
what do call it? The model of what the sign's gonna look like. Very nice.
One is going to be
on the right hand side
before over Andover.
So it's not gonna be, as I originally thought, at the town Not on the town line. Town. It's a line. Okay. So it's gonna be closer to the middle of town, which is good, the center of town
on Route 6. And then the other one's gonna go where the old fashioned pet cemetery is, where Chatty Mill Road is. Right. That'll be the second one to welcome people to Ennivore Bridge. So that's thing number one. And we also heard about
all of the public works needs
going forward
in
many detailed presentation
by J. Tuttle about what's gonna happen with public works.
Just wanna pass that along policy wise. I met with Val to talk about our
increasing educator diversity plan,
which is gonna be presented tonight for consideration.
And, Taylor, what happened with the kindergarten policy? Do you have it also? Okay. I knew you were working on that. I just was curious. Thank you.
>> Were you have you and
Robert Yes. And Robert and I met twice.
>> And if you we can talk about it when we get to the surplus discussion or whatever. But bottom line,
we need to come up with a
the two sticking points are these.
Number one, how is capital improvements gonna be defined?
And number two, if we have capital improvements,
who basically is gonna be the oversight on that? So we're up against what the Connecticut statute provides
and what the charter now provides. I understand there's a charter provision committee happening, so we'll see what happens with that.
And then what the town has proposed,
which is the town believes that if there are any capital improvements,
the town should be in charge of those.
And we just need to figure out as a board and then getting with,
the board of finance and whatnot,
what we believe about that. I mean, I certainly have my beliefs, but we need to hear from the board.
But yes. So I've have a call into and speaking with Cade as far as their definition of how other towns define capital improvements,
and not wanting to involve direct learning if we need to get to that point as far as
you remember the
I meant to bring my blue book. Yeah. The guru of education law having basically told us that it would be wonderful if everybody works together to
to deal with capital improvements in the town. But then there is the law, which is 10 s two twenty that says we're in charge of all of the
>> the school's property and how that's gonna be defined. So that's where Robert and I are. Okay. So what was the other sticking point? It was defining the capital improvement. And who's in charge of the Who's charge? Project. And who's in charge. Okay. Okay.
>> So for example,
when we get to talking about the plumbing issue where we get to talking about and that was the town's whole sticking point with the parking lot who's really
in charge of that. Is that, as they have said, town property or town school property,
and and how's that gonna be defined?
And we may not I mean, we have a policy all drafted. It's just coming up with those two sticking points, the result there.
But, depending on what the charter revision committee
comes up with, we may have a whole new policy that's coming through the Charter Revision Committee. And my understanding is
two things. They're just so everybody knows, I just found out about it. You're gonna be getting mailer.
There is a town meeting
next Tuesday that is being called very quickly.
And almost
noticed it was not even would be provided, but it's going to be dealing with grant money that's needed. Grant money. I think it's gonna be dealing with money that they need town approval for
for grants.
So the town is if the town gets a grant, there's a certain portion of it that needs to be approved by the town and
also ordinances that the board of selectman wants to put into place. And I don't have any further details on whatever, but we're supposed to do that, and then they go. Grant approval and town ordinance. Yeah. And as of this afternoon, Carol didn't even have the Agenda or or No. Even have the language of what the ordinance is. They're gonna try to put it in before. Feel like I don't have enough time for that. Well, they're already they're pushing for next Tuesday, and
we're supposed to be getting notice in the mail, but it will not include what the ordinances are, which I don't know is proper
as far as the notice requirements and whatnot. But
just so you know, next Tuesday, there's gonna be a town meeting. Spell out. Pardon? A whole list here, the Andover website
explaining
>> it all. Okay. I knew it was gonna go up on the website. Okay.
>> And it it involves,
town boundary lines,
with,
King Family on Burnett Road.
It involves the town
approving a boundary line agreement between
the Hawes family on School Road
and the town.
It involves see if the town will approve a seat grant
for improvements at Veterans Memorial Field.
This grant requires a minimum of 20% municipal match.
The town will use existing funds in the muni in the
multiuse building fund as
the town match,
which is a $150,000.
This will be partly monetary and part labor in kind by public works.
It's to see if the town will approve the purchase of a new John Deere Six one one nine m roadside mower
with a boo boom flail
by Tiger Bengal High m mid
mounted boom with a 50 inch flail head.
Purchase cost of stock demo unit is $203,874.
If we order instead of purchasing the stock unit,
it will
be $212,856
with a minimum of three hundred day delivery.
Per the board of finance motion, we are only financing the mower, not the equipment trailer,
which we purchased outright.
>> Does it include the language for the ordinances, Jerry? It's part of the Yeah. It does. Great. Okay. That must have gone on So this is on the website. Right? This is on the town website. Okay. Okay. We can look at our website. Can I ask a question going next to the policy thing with Robert? I guess I'm concerned about
>> the length of time that this is being dragged out. And then if we are
talking about putting money into
this
fund and the town has been talking about putting money into this fund,
how
I don't understand how we're voting on
things surrounding this when we don't have a policy in
>> ahead and roll into eight a since it's all gonna be a discussion. There
>> are two there are two so why Roder and I why it's taking so long is we had a different understanding of what the policy was supposed to be. No. I get that. No. No. No. I'm yeah. And we're doing our best. We've met twice as he has visitors in town now, so we couldn't get it in place for tonight. But
we've taken two full evenings to discuss all the different bakeries and whatnot. Bottom line is this. Where we are now is we're considering
the
the creation of two account two funds within one account.
Okay? So the town wants to create a fund wherein
it will be putting a 100 maybe, hopefully, as much as a $100,000
Right. Per year into that fund for our capital
use. Okay?
Where we had started off was we thought this was gonna be similar to the 2% nonlapsing fund. Yeah. No. Wait. I understand all that. So this is what we have to deal with. Really,
if we get down to the current law as and in addition to things, we are allowed to transfer whatever we want within our own I mean, we did what we were allowed to do by law.
So
the creation of all this problem is not really from us. It's from the town side, and it really upsets me that we are now however many months. We did this in June.
So we're now almost a full year beyond when this should have been decided, and we decided it. But where the roadblocks have come up is with regard to the town imposing roadblocks for what we decided was gonna be our construction project, and I guess we didn't proceed with that, which was a a godsend because we now have these plumbing issues. So
>> I guess my question is so, like, when we met as a triboard meeting
Yep. The the lawyer who was there, and I don't remember his name Mahal Koni. Helped me. The older guys. Tomoni. Tomoni. I Tomoni. I feel like he was very helpful Yep. And that everyone who was there was able to understand
Yep. What he was saying. Yep.
Would it not like,
could we have some kind of meeting again? Maybe not with everyone involved, but with them. That's your bailiwick. So we haven't had a three board meeting since then. No one wanted to until after we pass a town until after we budgets are passed. Right? Okay? Okay. So that that was understand that. Yes. That was what the feedback was from the other boards.
But in terms of having getting this policy actually written so that it's a real thing that people voted on and passed. Right? Because we passed one. We did. Yes. But no one else did.
>> The board of finance disagreed with it because they had a different sense of what the fund would be. Yes. So that's where that's what the Do you think that it's foreseeable to
>> We'd hope to do it for this meeting. Get to the point that their board will vote and pass something? I hope that's what Or do we need to have someone like him come back and be involved in the writing of said policy?
>> Possibly, I might involve him, but that's a lot of money. Isn't it? It's
yeah. I thought somebody said Mahoney.
I've tried to steer away from that by using Kay because we already paid for that. Mhmm. But I'll just say we'll have it for the May meeting. How about that? For our consideration,
it's really been what Robert believes the Board of Finance will be willing to agree to that's been the holdup. Yes. Which is where the two issues come in. So those meetings If I can so we're about to decide what to do with the possible action with a $103,000.
>> Yep. And a lot of that is dependent upon a fund that we don't have policy for.
>> So Well, we've already decided that the transfer can occur, which is our right to do.
>> So Yeah. We we can, but I
don't know that I'm comfortable putting it when we like, is it gonna go here and ever actually get used to fix anything? That's my whole point. I like so
what I would like to see and I and trust me. I get scheduling issues. If we can get I think we're at the point where once this policy is drafted, we don't need to wait for the May meeting. I personally would table eight a and have a special meeting as soon as, like, let's get this drafted, whatever we need to do,
>> and then let's get this done. That would be my opinion. I mean, I don't But we need I believe then we need the board of finance to vote on it before we vote on it as a board. Well, the other thing is the board of selectmen now wants to be involved. So They're not involved. There's no reason they need to be involved.
>> That's been a whole sticking point too. So they wanted the town has wanted CIP to be involved and the Board of Selectmen to be involved. Whereas at the three board meeting, what we talked about was a joint policy between the Board of Education and the Board of Finance. Correct. So it is yet another layer that's trying to be added, which I don't think is appropriate. And
>> So we are now in
April. April. April 17. And, you know, I honestly have no idea if
water started pouring out of the ceiling, how in the hell we would pay for it. This is the problem. Like
What's the difference between
a capital improvement
>> and a repair? Well, that's the thing. So if water starts pouring out of the ceiling, we've got repair and maintenance. So is repair and maintenance our responsibility,
or does it get to a threshold of how exactly the project is, which is defining what is a capital improvement?
And as I said, the other issue is, who oversees it, Steve? It's on our property,
and we're responsible for that by law. So for the town to come in and say,
we're gonna oversee this,
I don't think it's appropriate, but that's something that we need to decide, I guess, as a board.
And we could decide that right now and say this is what we want, the $102,000
to be used for. The town supposedly has an account. Everybody's told me they have an account. We could ask the town to put the 103,000
>> into that account. It's a fund and a murder account, but it's like a line item. Right. Yeah. But they were supposed to create, this is my understanding, many, many months ago, a separate account for the Board of Education. Right? Account. It is a line item in an existing fund because it earns more money to have it that way than to have it be a separate account. Okay.
So
>> Sharon? So what does the board feel? My feeling is that Yep. The way things have been going and the track record that's been going for the last eight to ten months,
I think if this is our overage,
we should treat it like any other year's overage,
ask for 2% to be put into our 2% account,
and the rest of it, just give it to them because that's what would ordinarily happen with that kind of
an overage in our budget at the end of the year.
>> If we do the 2%, we need the board of finances agreement to allow us to put the 2% in. Correct. So we still have another layer that's there. How much would 2% be out of the 103,000
or out of all of last year's over? It says the total floor break. Roughly 80. 80 80.
>> What happens if they go to the budget meeting
for the town
and the town says to them,
no. You can't have this money for a mower
or all these big ticket items they want.
And then what? And then they say, well, we're gonna take the 100,000
$103,000
from the pool,
and we're gonna buy the mower with it.
>> I
think that that
I I think there's this like, the we're not warring factions. No. We're not. I I don't see them going, we're gonna take the money that we set aside in a school fund and use it to go buy a long book.
I I believe that I mean, because fundamentally,
they want to see this get completed as much as we do. We're we're stuck on technicality too. Yeah. And,
obviously, we So let's talk about it. So let's
>> yeah. Number one,
I guess the one question I have is part of it is when I look in here, I think we need to define our own policy for what constitutes in house maintenance, when we're gonna who we're gonna involve, when we're gonna involve. We need to find a policy for when we're gonna at which point we're gonna go to bids and things like that. I I think we're missing that. That's what I've been working. That's part of the policy that Robin and I have been drafting. But internally on our board of ed policies, we need to say that this is you know, so there's a, you know, a process chart. A flowchart says if you meet this, this is our path. SOP. Yeah. And SOP.
But in the interim,
k, we have a parking lot and a bathroom. Frankly,
I've driven on the parking lot every day this year. I I'm I'm not thinking that's a major issue. What can we just somebody resummarize what's going on with the bathrooms and the extent of, like, how many bathrooms are down? What does that cost? What what are we actually at right now with the bathroom situation? So it began because there was a leak downstairs.
>> They didn't know where that smell had come from.
They determined when I say they, it's the same company
that the town uses. It's Rick Wilson with Mitek.
Rick Wilson came in.
He spoke with us and with the custodians
and let us know that,
yep, there was a leak there, and it was coming from the pipe that goes up to the urinal in the boys' bathroom upstairs
in the 456.
We had SURFRO come and clean at their advice,
and they fixed that.
It has been fixed since. However,
when Rick was there,
Rick did say at that time, hey.
You know, at some point here,
all of the piping that's underneath that empty open foundation portion there,
it's the original.
You guys have to think about,
doing this. And I said, is this something that has to be done right this second? He said, nope. I said, what are we looking at? In his verbal best estimation
at that time, he said, probably about 200.
And I said, is that something that gets done all at one time? Like, one school year is at what level of risk here? And he said, no. I said, is it a $50,000 a year thing? Four years? He said, sure.
And so that's what we were originally
talking about when we found out about this. Shortly after that,
when they came back to check and to do something in the, bathroom,
they then said,
you know, we're not sure that it's a 100% leak proof,
considering the situation. So we would recommend
that you not use that bathroom. Could you live without that boy's bathroom? And we said yes.
So we closed that bathroom not because
at that particular time it was a risk to the children. It was to avoid having
something occur
like what had happened, with that urinal before.
And so, obviously, when we close that one bathroom, it's backed up to the, you know, the other bathroom, the female bathroom.
And so we closed them both as well as the single one that is on the other side. So there is still on the
upstairs floor, there is still boys and girls bathrooms up there, just at the other end of the hallway where the
conference room is and the nurses' room, that side of the 1st Floor.
On the basement here, the downstairs floor, all of the bathrooms are in working order. So you have the two by the gym. You have the ones out here, and the pre k k rooms over here have bathrooms in those. So we are not without bathrooms.
And so the recommendation was, though, if you're going to start working up there, then sure. You should look at this as a segment one of the full project.
And so,
that's where that came from. And
Eric and the town, I believe,
Celeste Wright, they
also chose to utilize the expertise of Mitek in getting,
some advice from them about the project. And that is where the town is coming, up with the same number, that it's gonna be about $200,000
>> to do everything. Right. And and, also, Rick Wilson had said he he is not comfortable That's what I was gonna ask about. With
this is a big job. This is not you know, this is a much bigger scope, and he had suggested having an having an engineer take a look at it. Right. An MEP. So during the CIP meeting, Eric Anderson had said that,
again, Rick had mentioned,
again, this is a big job. You really it it would be in the best interest to have, an MEP
done
because, number one,
it it is a larger scope work,
and it could the the MEP could come back and say, actually, it's not gonna cost you 200,000.
It's only gonna cost you 10,000.
So it would be worth the investment to have it done.
I had asked Eric in that CIP meeting, how much does an MEP cost? I have I have no idea. And he said somewhere along the lines of about maybe 15,000.
And I point blank asked him, who pays for that? Do we pay for that? Does the town pay for it? And it was his understanding.
And, again, without making
any,
you know, agreement,
he said that, well, this would be something that the town would take on because, again, this is would be a capital, you know, a a capital project. Capital improvement
when we have bathrooms that we're not using?
I would argue that it is. I would I would think that it's not a repair. I I would argue that it is a capital improvement, that it's we're looking at a $200,000
>> fix. This isn't, you know, repairing a a leaky ceiling. This is something that's, you know, a larger scope. I was arguing that we just said minimum regardless of how we want, and this is where I think internally we needed to find this. Yeah. We're we're at a $200,000 job,
and, again, this is a school. We need somebody
who has more expertise than us Yeah. Looking at this to make the decision before we pull the trigger on $200,000
and then go, oh,
nope. Now we didn't fix it or we Right. The my other concern with the two bathrooms being I get this not an urgent. Like, it's not hurt. Except what's the next what's the next side? Addition of a preschool class. We're we're adding more kids to the school. Having stuff not open
is not the way to go.
So did he give a timeline on that meeting? No. Because we haven't I haven't we haven't So what do we need to do to I think that's makes the MEP will tell us exactly what we're doing. So
>> what we need to do out of that CIP meeting,
we
my two action items were were to,
get
to talk to you all to get approval to,
change the surplus from
using it for the driveway, which we originally had voted on to now using it for the plumbing. But like Caitlin said, I'm not too sure if
if we vote on it for the plumbing.
And what do we what do we do with the money? Do do we hold on to it? Do we give it to the town? Because if we give it to the town, we have no there's no policy yet about how this how this money gets spent. So I I don't know. Then what is our date on that money?
>> Because there's a date. We do. Right? Yeah. But the date is for
>> the date is for an encumbered item.
Technically, now that the audit is over,
that money either
has to, as Jerry said,
we have to get approval to put it in an account that you guys control,
which is the 2% nonlapsing.
Or as Celeste mentioned earlier, if that money goes back to the to the town,
you're not you're not deciding what happens to that money thing. Either
>> way, we're either gonna ask the board of selectmen or the board of fin we can ask the board of finance to take and put the money in the 2%,
or we're gonna ask the board of selectmen to take the money and pretty please put it in this account that we are open. Yep. That right. And to and to put it in with the with the potential 100,000 that they're that they're proposing. And
>> I would argue that I think it's a show of good faith on our side in wanting to work with the town to put the money into that fund that now exists
even though we don't have a policy that shows how we use it. Because that would be
putting the money where our mouth is and saying that we want this project to move forward, and we want to have the town work with us to fix things that need to be fixed. And I think, personally,
that putting 80,000 of it back in the nonlapsing
and then giving the rest back to the town just continues this division that we've been really good at meeting. Well and more than that,
>> it's giving away $20.
Right.
Yeah. We're we're literally gonna say, well, alright. Even if the port finance approves it, they can only approve up to somewhere around 85,000,
which means rest of money gone.
That's going to the news whatever we want. I would rather, you know, kind of roll the dice either way at this point
with a 103.
Right. I'd rather you know, I I think based off of all the meetings and everything we've said, the town is
on a number of records saying that we're asking for this money to go towards that. At this point, that would make the most sense to me.
>> I'm And who's in charge of the project?
So if we agree tonight, let's say we want, to agree on an MEP.
Right? That's great. That can be part of what the money is used for. Terrific. We need to get that immediately, and then we know the scope of the project. Right?
I guess let's not get to that point until we know the scope of the project, but that is a decision we need to make.
>> But whether what I'm saying, we aren't gonna have control. If we give this money to Board of Finance, Board of Finance can vote and say, nope. And then we get zero. On nonlap. The nonlap. At which point, we have nothing. We can't spend it on an MEP right now because we we didn't encumber it for an MEP. It was encumbered for parking lots. Square. And and So we have to give it back to the town in one way or another. So it's either ask for it to go in our nonlap thing and and hope that we get 85 or ask for it to go on this account.
If it goes here, then hopefully we can apply that towards
>> And and the way Eric said, the the MEP would not the to fund to pay for the MEP would not come out of this
AES Capital
fund. It would come out of another I I forget what he called it, but it it the the usual
maintenance that that the town has, their fund. So it wouldn't come out of this. It would come out of their normal
again, I'm using the wrong word, but it wouldn't come out of this. It would come out of their normal, maintenance and
fund that they use for for things like this. So it wouldn't come out of that.
>> Do do Jerry and Mike, do you guys have thoughts on
all of this?
>> Go first. I
will go first. Sure.
Everybody is making valid points.
And,
personally, I'd like to know what we're dealing with.
I'd like some
affirmation from the other boards,
the board of finance and the board of selectmen.
I'm a little
astonished at how much the town is spending,
and
I'm wondering when
the people of Andover are gonna start saying no.
>> Maybe in May. Pardon? Maybe in May. That's when our move is. I wish I had some guarantees.
>> The state in your sense is like rolling the dice.
We may win. We may not.
I don't I don't know.
Based on past experiences,
I'd rather have
some kind of a
guarantee
from the town
to cover what the MEP
says.
This bowl of wax is gonna cost you
200,000.
What happens if that bowl of wax, if the MEP gets done,
cost you 50,000?
What happens if after that MEP
doesn't think,
it's gonna cost you 300,000?
What are the
parameters?
We don't know.
So we're we're I can see taking a vote to move it away from the parking lot fund.
I can see you taking a vote and moving it to the
plumber fund
or the bathroom fund.
I can agree to
all of it. I just
I'm a little scared, I'll tell you.
A little nervous.
Because I I hate to
take that kind of money
and not have any assurances.
That's where I feel. I'm nervous. Okay.
>> How about you, Matt? No. I I think I just go back to the policies. I'm gonna keep my response short direct to the policies. Policies kinda dictate what we should do.
I don't see a policy that tells us how we we should handle these situations. I think that's what's being worked on. I'm not comfortable going forward with something like this until a policy tells us how we're supposed to handle it.
Shree, how about you?
>> So I
I think that we should give it back to the
the
sorry.
The the plan where we give it back,
have them allocate it at this point. I think we're spinning our wheels.
To Mike's point, we don't have a policy.
And, honestly, I think
we do need to sit down with the other town boards again. I think
you know, Shannon, I understand your point. We have a lawyer paid with by Cave, but I think at the end of the day, we need probably a third party who
does not have
a horse in the game. Right? Like, a horse in the race. We should have a mediator
that is
non biased when we come to, like, a larger decision on capital improvements. But this time, I say we'd roll the dice. We give them back the money,
and just let's let's move this forward.
>> Can I can I just ask you a qualifying question? When you're saying give back the money, do you need to put the
the two purse into the 2% nonlapsing and give the town back the other or to put it into the fund that they created for capital improvement?
>> So
what so I guess
and
this is where, I guess, I don't I'm not completely educated on this, but
the fund they created is a line item.
And and I guess
based on the policies we have now,
with this money unencumbered, what would we normally do at the end of the year?
>> Right. So if we would put up to the we would put money into our 2% nonlapsing.
We we ask the board of finance to put, up to 2% in the the 2% non nonlapsing.
And then anything over that, we would hand it back to the town. No. Then that's That's the transfers that we agree
>> can occur within our budget,
and then we would ask for it to be put in the 2%, which is exactly what we did. Right. That
>> being said, though, I mean, does meaning technically
should have been
given back, what, a year ago?
>> No. It should have been transferred the way we asked them to be transferred. Because we we we encumbered it for the parking lot. So and then our plan was to move forward with the parking lot, and then we were we we hit major roadblocks with the town with permits and the like, and that's Yeah. No. No. Understood. And and now Now it doesn't need to be done until after the audit is done. So we're not that far Right. Since the audit's been done. Right.
Go ahead, Brie. I'm sorry.
>> No. I understand that. But I I'm saying it's it's
forget what happened last year with the money and where it was transferred because we know based on the audit and it's not encumbered. It's like it's we're starting from scratch in my opinion. So what would we normally do if it is we would put the percentage in the nonlapsing, and then we give it back. That's what I think we should do.
>> I'm gonna make a motion that we ask the town
to out of as was offered at the CIP meeting,
out of the town's maintenance fund,
to
pay for an MEP
to assess the plumbing needs at Andal Elementary School.
One second.
Can you can you just repeat it,
>> please? Ask the town
to pay for an MEP
out of the town's maintenance funds
to assess the needs, the plumbing needs at Andover Elementary School, I guess I should get, for the existing
problems with the bathrooms.
>> Which Eric essentially said at CIP that they would do.
>> Like, we he came back to us, remember, and said we needed you to ask for it and determine what the Board of Education's
request was in that regard.
>> Okay. I don't remember it that way. I the the way I wrote it down was that, basically, during that meeting,
he was going to hold on. I have the notes here.
>> We need to make a decision, Celeste, on what we want as far as an MEP.
So
the town then could say, no. We're not gonna pay for it or whatever they're gonna do with it. But the offer was made, and I think the board needs to take action to say, yes. We want this to occur. Irrespective of that, do we need to make a decision tonight about the 100 and We have until most
>> next meeting because we have until June 1 to make a decision. So Okay. So your plan is to want to ask for this first?
>> Yes. And then we have to make a decision until we My concern is they approve it. The only thing is just
knowing having,
you know, this real life. It's not like that's gonna
occur Right. You know, in a two week time frame. So what the odds of actually and I get what you're saying. I agree. Saying is we can't make a decision until we know. But we're not going to have a choice. Is I don't this MVP is not gonna be done by any chance. I understand.
You still have to So I agree that I think we should continue with the motion and go ahead do a or Yeah. Whatever. Like, let's go ahead and formally support
>> whatever. Let's get the MEP done by the time. Well, that that I'm a 100% on board with. We're still gonna have to make a decision on this month. But I guess that was my point is I I feel like, like, we just keep kicking the can down the road. We still need to make a decision about the money, and we're not gonna have an answer on this
>> at our next meeting when we have to make a decision. But guess because the motion's on the floor Yeah. Already? Motion on the floor. Mhmm. Last question, just clarifying question.
>> We
are asking the town to pay for this using town funds
Mhmm. Right,
that doesn't mean that ultimately they would be in charge of Correct. Project down the road. We're not Correct. That. We just The wanna motion is very clear. We're asking the town to pay for an MEP Thank you.
>> To assess our needs.
Thank you for clarifying that. That that's why I was very pointed in that regard.
>> But don't you think they would come back and say, if we're gonna pay for the MEP, then we're gonna then we're gonna do the work?
This is I just I I just want them to do the work. No. No. They But I no. I'm just
playing devil's ass. I just don't I don't know why we need to have the I just don't know why we need to have it. Funds. They made the offer, and we need to get it done ASAP.
>> And even though the CIP met a month ago, I don't see unless you've heard something, I didn't hear any communications,
>> there hasn't been any offer by the town to hire an MEP. Because we haven't we haven't decided what we're gonna do. If you just send them in okay. Never mind.
>> I don't know. I think we to have to move with regard to asking the MEP. I'm gonna move to close the question.
>> We had a discussion. Let's So on on this is on just the motion. On just the motion for the MEP. Correct. Yeah. Ask the town to complete the MEP.
Sure. Okay. No. We have to ask for. Okay.
All in favor? Aye. Aye. Aye. Aye.
Great.
>> That's exciting. Now I'm gonna make a motion, and we can continue this discussion to
request that a $103,000
surplus be moved to the
capital improvement fund or the AES got back in from
>> Duncan, all in favor?
Well, any discussion. Or any discussion?
>> Just so we're clear, you're talking about putting it asking the town to put it into the fund.
That's the line item in the town's fund for the school. Yes. Correct. Correct. Correct. Yes.
Any discussion? Currently working on the policy for? Well,
yes. But
Yes. Okay.
Any discussion?
>> Feel like we've already discussed this. Great. But does anybody else have anything else left to say?
>> Okay? I guess one thing to say. So to clarify, if you don't do that with the one zero three surplus,
the other option would be to ask for the percentage that can go into the nonlapsing to go into the nonlapsing and then give the remainder back to the town. And
>> correct. And the other thing that I would just say is at this time,
we have been told by the town that they will move this to the capital. But the board of finance has not indicated or we haven't asked at this time if they'll move anything into the nonlapsing.
And come June 1, they get it all back. Correct.
So K.
Any other discussion?
I don't have any discussion. Anybody else?
>> Okay. So what is So what's the motion? Is to take the $103,000
surplus as in item
eight a and ask that that be moved to the AES Capital Improvement Fund at the
a line item on the town side. Line item on the town side. Okay. And that was seconded by Caitlin. Yes. Okay. Alright. And we have no further discussion. Okay.
>> All in favor or we'll take a vote? No. We've got any votes. Okay. Vote. Alright. Steve, what do you vote? Aye.
Aye.
>> Sorry. I'm sorry. One more. He said he said me. I think yeah.
>> He said you I said aye. Yes. Said You said aye. He said aye. And Brie?
Aye.
Okay. So that was No. Shannon. Shannon, I'm sorry.
I'm gonna abstain.
Okay. So that was 511.
5511.
Okay. Motion.
Alright. Now the light works out. Alrighty.
>> And who do I ask the town then? I mean, as far as paying for the MEP, is that something that I'm gonna communicate, or how does that work? I'll get a letter sent to you for your approval. Okay.
>> So there's two letters then based on the motions Yep. That I will draft for you and send to you, Celeste, and then you can do what you need to do and send them out. Okay. The first one will ask the town to,
pay for the MEP out of the maintenance fund Yep. As promised by the meeting, and I'll get the date from CIP. And the other one will be asking,
for the, $103,000
to be moved to
the AES
town fund.
Okay.
And then
that
after that letter goes over,
Terry will follow-up with Okay.
>> Making arrangements for that. So that one goes to board of finance. The first one, does that go to board of selectmen or to Goes to the town. Goes to the town. Right. Town. Okay.
>> Well, to the the treasurer will get the Sure. Okay. Yeah. Okay. The CIP meeting date was 03/21.
>> And, again, Eric didn't promise that the town would pay for it. He said that it would come out of if it was to be done, it would most likely come out of the town maintenance fund, but he did not know we're requesting
We're asking. Right. Yeah. Right. What I'm just saying, but he did not promise that that's what was going to happen because I asked him point blank who pays for it. So okay.
Okay.
Babe,
preschool classroom.
>> So we we have given you everybody's by and not Oh, yeah. Taylor's
report did give you Taylor's
report did give you the back information,
and thank you, Taylor, for that. We are, overcapacity
for our three preschool programs for next year.
Remember, the preschool program is not funded,
through the general fund. It is funded through school readiness.
It is funded through Smart Start, and it is funded through tuition.
Tuition
is
for the residents of the town of Andover.
Tuition is
600 or 6,000 for the year, 600 a month, 6,000 for the year. But residents,
by our own policies
and school readiness
oversight,
our regular,
Andover residents, rather, are able to,
often be on sliding scales.
So, you know, we never know exactly what the amount of money is that is gonna come in, whether or not someone takes the school readiness spot Smart Start, but
we have roughly
a $100,000
that comes in from
school readiness.
We have
$65,000
that comes in roughly because it varies a little bit every year, but roughly $65,000
that comes in from Smart Start.
And those are pretty guaranteed every year, so that's not, like, one of the
pop up ones that we sometimes get from Esser and things like that.
And
then tuition that comes in, as I said,
is the 6,000
for the other people who And that and that 6,000
is for anyone who is an out of towner. They pay that point. Right. So so that was the Andover ones that we're talking about. The out of towners and we take every Andover resident. Yeah. So
whether they are regular ed or special education, whether they're birth to three, whether they, you know, just come in because they just moved here.
The out of towners,
the preschool is different than tuition for regular
out of towners. And
so the preschool tuition is that set 6,000 a year. Mhmm.
And
we do not take in birth to three from other districts. They go to their own district preschool programs,
so that's not a factor for us.
And although we're mandated, obviously we're happy to, but we're mandated to take special education students from the town of Andover. We are not,
mandated to take any, special education students from out of town.
We do have our policy not to do that, not because we wouldn't like to educate them, but because then you're talking about additional expenses over and above the 6,000.
And,
so we don't. So all of those students that come in from out of town pay full price.
Our tuition has not gone up in a number of years, which makes us very attractive
to,
other districts coming in to fill any open and empty spots that we would potentially have with this fourth preschool.
So right now,
45 kids I'm sorry. 51 kids fills up our three
preschools.
That's as Taylor mentioned.
We have 54
right now, with no additional,
birth to threes coming in next year, no additional handover,
students moving into the district.
So, those 54 push us to a point where 60 would be four rooms.
So what we would need to do is solicit six more kids,
not with packets already with us for next year. That would be assuming we would take all of the packets that we already have,
and we would solicit six more, which we don't actually even have to go out and do because Taylor has already gotten,
at least 10 people who wanna come. And so
>> What's the sorry. No. Sorry. I'm just very confused as to you just said tuition hasn't gone up in multiple years. Which is why we are, yeah, definitely,
we're 6,000 a year. Why hasn't it gone up in multiple years? The board has not voted to increase the tuition. So we're talking about adding another teacher
yet not passing it like,
the cost now comparative, I know, to other towns is, as we've mentioned, significantly lower. At some point, our costs have gone up.
The teachers' costs have gone up.
Like, we need to pass some of that cost on. Well, no. No. No.
>> We we haven't made we make any tuition for three years. I don't want you to misunderstand.
>> 10%. Between school readiness, smart start, and tuition,
until this point, they've been self sufficient.
So we had to And now they're not. No. No. No. We're not not self sufficient. But if we add the classes, we are. No. Because that's the point is that they would all pay that full price. They would pay our 6,000. It should still keep us. Now what I was gonna say is what we would then need to look at for the following school year
is, at the end of the school year, how many are Andover residents, how many are out of towners,
and really look at our projection.
Because we can always
count on an out of towner being 6,000.
We can't always count on an Andover student being 6,000.
They could be zero. They could be zero. And
>> so what we would have to consider that following year is a potential increase to tuition,
for the following year.
>> But we would have to look at our,
you know, our forecast.
What But What is the cost to run the program? So I get the tuition cost, like, and what you're getting from grants. Like, I can get all that down, but I don't
I can't conceptualize in my head what is the cost to run the program with three classrooms versus to run it with four classrooms.
And I know you're gonna say, like, if there's aids that you need for individual kids, like, that affects it. Well, but it it doesn't really affect it because the aids would be for
>> individual aids would be for Andover kids. If a if a if a
hypothetically,
if a child came to us that was an Andover child with You have to provide that to them. Have provide that. But based on the numbers,
we're
talking about two potential things. Number one, in terms of the salary. It would depend on who was hired.
If it was a person that was hired that was,
equally as skilled but equally as new as the last two preschool teachers that we've hired,
they would fall under
the
$65,000
range. So So 10 out of town kids of the 15 in that class is 60,000.
>> That must have been So you're so you're looking at No. Because they're out of town. Because they're out of town. Oh, okay. So you're
looking at, like The cost of the teacher. That but that's a separate fact. So trying to break it down to saying that, like, each classroom
like, the kids in each classroom cover the cost of that classroom?
>> It it could it could occur that way. It would depend when we hire,
>> the preschool teacher, where that preschool teacher know. Do they I mean, I imagine a pre K class, you need a paraprofessional in there. After certain number of kids, you do. Yes. So we're gonna need a para and a teacher if we're looking to pull off.
>> But if you have 54
kids
and we are
gonna say no, let's just say to a couple of out of town kids or a couple of staff members' kids and say, instead, we'll squeeze them all into three preschools.
The issue becomes
if there are multiple high needs kids in a classroom of 18,
>> you are still gonna have to put two No. I I understand. I just wanna understand the full cost You know what I'm saying? When we get together. What I was trying do. I'm trying to get the yeah. I I'm not saying that. I'm not looking to be able to do that, but I wanna know if we're adding the class, what the actual cost of the kids, what's their cost of attendance? Is that zero also? No. It's full tuition. It's full tuition. Okay.
>> Right. So then currently so you said they're nine out of towners and six
stat kits. Right? Yes. So
so that's 90 that's 90,000. Yeah. It's 15 total. So
>> looking at the budget, we already told plus 65 plus 90. That we would have to add to that budget. Right? No. See, we don't believe that we have to add to that budget. We don't believe what's my worst case?
We right now think that we still keep the budget where it is.
>> We believe that if we But that's the believe what's my absolute worst case, all of the you know, with when you get all Andover kids there would be, what, a 100,000?
65,000?
What what I'm just trying to figure out what what is our exposure here as far as worst case scenario if we don't see problem. If if, like, suddenly next month I got 15 Andover kids and had to say no to the 15 Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What is our actual cost gonna be?
>> We but see, that's where and I know you guys just said a few minutes ago, somebody said, I know. Sometimes you don't know. That would happen with three rooms or four rooms because we don't know. If it's an Andover person that moves in that's special needs, if it's an Andover person that moves in that's,
sliding scale on the bottom, that's why that is I don't wanna use the word more dangerous. That's more we don't know. I I can't answer that question about that particular family. I can answer the question of
what happens if you fill the rest of that fourth room with out of towners. I can tell you that that's guarantee. Right. So that's a guarantee
of,
total
for those kids, then that's a guarantee of
eight at least,
80 to $90,000
>> during the course of the year total of the out of town tuition. Without looking at additional children, meaning, like, additional out of towners for more tuition, the total from what they provided is 255,000.
If
we divide that by four classrooms, that's 63
like, almost $64,000
per teacher. Plus Andover tuition.
Yeah. That's not including Andover tuition. Which we are. I'm just trying to gather. Pretending that every kid in Andover was zero. Right. Which is not even Which is not true. So we know. If you divide it by three classrooms,
that's 85,000
per, like, per teacher. Right. So so, really, roughly, like, even if you're dividing
those totals, which wouldn't be your totals if you opened a fourth classroom, you're still
around that 60,000
or higher than that. Right.
>> And so that's why for this year, because
it would work out that we would be looking at
them being filled by out of towners,
it actually makes us more confident.
Now when we're sitting here together at a meeting next year going, do we or don't we need the fourth classroom?
The number could be different. Because if six kids moved into Andover
and we can't take the six kids at 60 I mean, at, $6,000,
so I can't guarantee you that I'm gonna be bringing in $36,000
in tuition, then I might be saying something different. I might be saying, Steve, I don't I don't know. That room actually might not pay for itself
because it's an Andover resident.
And so,
we don't know what will happen with the future moving forward. It's gonna depend on a few things. It'll depend on how many move in to Andover. I can tell you, I was speaking about birth records with the town
clerk with Carol,
and she said, Valerie, I did not realize I'm going through the birth certificates. She said, there's a ton of babies that were born in this town that are younger than the preschoolers you have. I said, I know them, Carol. So we actually you know, it was confirmed by the the town clerk that, you know, we are pretty confident moving forward that even next year, we're still gonna be looking at 60 kids, if not even more than that at that point because a lot of our preschoolers have little brothers and sisters at home. Well, especially when you look at the cutoff change and the number Right. That for this year. Well, no. That's gonna be moving forward. But Yeah. I know. But that but then it'll The other kids moving up. This is the year that we'll see the impact. There are also, though,
>> neighboring programs like Hebron are not accepting 2.9
year olds anymore. They've pushed their pre K age now. We have not. So some of these kiddos are actually committing to three years here with us because we're accepting that. Yeah. Other programs, because they don't have the spots, are saying, no. We can't do that. So,
you know, it's also I don't anticipate right now that we're there's no way in a month we're getting 15 new Andover kids because most of Andover,
they're gonna they know we get their spot. We might get a few that happened.
What I do anticipate is
June, July, those six spots all of a sudden when some Hebron families are like, oh, wait.
Or Columbia, I'm not getting into kinder. Or, wait. I can't you know, that's typically works. I'll make that. Yeah. And you have and and I'm sorry. You have you have been I'm sorry. 54 registered students right now. Correct. And I so 60 would be more than had about between five to 10 inquiries. People just as I was reaching out. So I have that, and that's been kind of rolling those five to 10. You know, fuck. 10 come in. I'd say out of those five to 10, I'm registering three to four, and then you get another set. You know? You need to keep a buffer if we get a birth to three. Correct. Yeah. I don't wanna be in a position where anyone moves in, birth to three, that I'm like, oh, no. Yeah. You don't want that one to be No. So you have you have to keep a buffer. Basically, if you have 14 kids and four classrooms
>> Yep. Then you have spots for Correct. A couple kids if you have to add because the max is 17. So usually so you have Yeah. Which is the same. It isn't Illegally, it's actually 18.
>> But Right. No. But so if we approve tonight
the addition of this, it's going to trigger
you're obviously, obviously, looking forward to hire another pre k teacher. And
are we going to also be hiring an additional pair of professional for that? So the thing is, remember, this is also the time of the year when,
>> in terms of the other children in the building,
the other the other children in the building that, have special education needs that already utilize our paraprofessionals,
this is the time of the year when we are looking at their end of the year IEPs.
We're figuring out service hours. We're figuring out what kids need from our existing paraprofessionals.
So, Steve, the answer to that is we probably will, but Taylor and I have already discussed the fact that we will not be posting to hire a para until June, if not later.
And the reason being, there is no need for the extra para in the summer. And what happens if we hire a paraprofessional at the end of the year for next year and a special education student moves?
Right. A special education student that requires a one to one moves.
So it would be foolish
for that position since it is,
you know, less
difficult
like a teacher, there are cert certifications
and things like that. We will be waiting to hire that paraprofessional
because we don't wanna get stuck in a situation where we hire somebody and then we have that extra ability. Not that we have extra ones floating around, but if somebody moves.
>> You guys already say that you're hiring someone for preschool because a preschool teacher is gonna teach another grade? That is moving. Yeah. So then you would hire two preschool teachers if we approve a fourth bucket. Yes. Okay. And then just and then do we have and then I'm I'm assuming the school readiness grant and everything, that's where we can furnish this classroom, like, with with that? Or We already had,
>> the two places to furnish the classroom. The first one was we already had you're allowed to hold over.
You can roll over two months worth of tuition that you collect in the month of May and June.
Not
what is promised to you. It's the residuals of what's owed. So if your child was in preschool and you already paid me $5,500,
and in May and June you paid me 500, I can hold the 500 over.
But that's it. Only
in the end of the year. So there's $5,000
still in that pre k money
that we knew
that we were going to have to replace stuff even because we opened that third classroom so late last year in November or this past year in November that we didn't get everything in it. And so we already knew that we were going to need stuff, and that's where it was coming from. The other option that we have for that, and this is why it doesn't have to come out of the tuition, is I told you sometimes there's those pop ups. And if you remember this year, we had the school readiness enrollment based
grant
that popped up last year that I applied for. And so there's 10,000 in there that can be used between this year and next.
For to furnish it? Well, for preschool related expenses. Right. Right. And so we used it right. So it would qualify there. So we've already discussed what will we do for that room,
and it absolutely
is something that could be done with that one. I'm gonna I'm sure you guys already figured this out as well, but there's space in the building for that room to exist and mess up the other Ms. Leinberger that was here tonight with her kids, that room is the end room down here, and it's kindergarten. Because remember, the pre K rooms have bathroom in there.
So that kindergarten move room moves up.
There's the room on the other side of the library now where Caraboni and Fraser are in. That one becomes the kindergarten classroom,
and everybody
just moves up one. And then one of them moves up until they're upstairs. So, yeah, logistically,
you know, we're all set there. Yeah?
>> Brie, do you have any questions?
Michael or Jerry or Shannon, do you have any questions? No. That would be I have no questions. I just feel
>> that
you have frustrated.
Like, principal.
Jerry, do wanna make a motion? I make a motion
that we vote to approve an additional preschool classroom.
I will second set a motion.
All in favor?
Say aye. Aye.
>> Good. Alright. That's
seven
zero zero. So moved. Okay. And
>> as Taylor mentioned before, just one last thing, we debit the accreditation.
So we will be accrediting then for next school year, and we will have then six accredited rooms, four preschool rooms
and two kindergarten rooms. That's pretty cool. The only we will be the only one in our,
region here with an accredited, kindergarten program. That's the Kanaya Kukuna. Yes. It's a small group of the state as well. I mean Oh, yeah. Very small group of the state. Yeah. So so we're actually pretty excited. I know she's very nervous that My heart is already ready. She's very nervous that the accreditation window is coming this next month, but I'm thrilled that it's gonna be over by the end of the school year. So Awesome. Thank you. Alright.
The new IED
policy.
Let's see.
You're handing that out? Yep. Okay. Alright.
Thank you. Sure.
>> So this is a first read, so nothing has to be voted on tonight.
So this is a first read. Nothing else we voted on tonight. This was simply
and I know Shannon's got some changes on there.
This is simply the
policy version putting into effect Of what we went through. Of what we went through with my plan.
And so it's very it's very basic.
It just the first couple of paragraphs would just talk about why this needs to be a policy because of the public act.
And that in that second paragraph,
that to follow the mandate,
the board directed the submission
of that,
IED program before plan before March 15
and that it was,
approved.
And then it will go down. Those seven things that are listed there are simply the abridged version of what was in those three sections under the hiring, recruitment, and selection
and retainment.
And so that's just the the the short version there.
And then on the bottom is the, legal references.
And one of the things we did is to kind of, we looked at CABE's
suggested mandate,
and then
really talked to I really talked to a couple of the other districts that had ones that were already approved this month by their, boards, and,
less was more,
making sure that it meets the mandate. It's it's new.
And so, you know, the the policy itself would have the required language in it. Shannon, was there anything you wanted to add in there? No. The only thing I was questioning that we didn't discuss is
>> we approved last time of your submitting it for the March 15 deadline. Yep. And I couldn't recall whether or not there were in like, further annual submissions
>> Yep. Once we've created the policy. So the number seven is the board will review on an annual basis the effectiveness of the plan to increase diverse
flow
and attract a qualified candidates.
That's for us to do, but I'm asking we don't have to put in any more plan. No. The only thing you guys have to do is to have us self assess at the end Right. Every year and see if we need to change that plan. That was it.
Alright. So we're just reading this. And then Yep. Next month. And then next month, it'll be on there for a second read and a boob. Okay. The only thing as much as I hope you'll be here for a long time It's the same thing. Six should be. We'll put there. I changed it. Yeah. Shannon already she got she got the prettying up of that.
She is very good at that.
Okay.
>> Alright. Thank you very much for working on it, and we'll just put it on the agenda for next month to hopefully do that.
>> Kindergarten policy. That one's coming. Alright.
Again,
you know, obviously, I talked to my superintendent's group and my small town groups, but
then I also asked Taylor, and, like, she didn't have enough to do with the NIAP right now. I asked her to also speak with the other principals to find out.
There was a lot of information that was provided by CABE.
And in some cases, people were choosing
to have this policy include,
and their bigger districts, what
they would utilize for screenings or what they would utilize for a letter requesting,
that their child potentially be moved up. There were lots of things that people added, but the basic requirement are these paragraphs here that just says that you are complying with the legal obligation
because each child age five years and under
18 and high school with
the general statute 10 dash one eighty four. Effective 07/01/2024,
the Andover School District shall be open to residents,
children five
years and over who reach that age by the first day of September. That's the legal mandate there.
For children who do not reach the age of age of five on or before September 1, the parent or guardian may submit a written request to the principal of the school seeking early admission to the district. Like I said, the only thing we didn't add here that a couple districts did was what that would look like. We didn't have a form. I didn't think we needed one. We'd be talking about a few kids max for this year, and that they would send a letter. One year and then this policy And they would send it to Taylor. Correct. Hard to say. The legislation hasn't Right. Changed. This could remain.
The right. But even still, they would look at our policy and see, oh, I have to put a letter in the house. Right. Yeah. Upon receipt of such written request, the principal and an appropriate certified staff member shall assess each child to determine whether admittance to the,
for the child is developmentally appropriate.
For decisions relating to early decision, the decision of the principal and appropriate certified staff shall be final.
I know Taylor working with the reading what the principal's had and myself with the superintendents.
I think that that suffices
because
for us to name
what that,
device is that we're gonna use to assess will vary from child to child. If it's a non English speaker,
we may have an assessment device that is in a foreign language. If it's a special education or a nonverbal student where for whatever reason,
then we would that certified
developmentally appropriate person would be different. So it also doesn't say that it's a preschool teacher, a kindergarten teacher,
an OT, a PT, a speech. And so I I feel that Better to be better. It is. And the legislation just says administrates.
Correct. That's that's the requirement.
Yeah. Right. But this one says it's not solely the principal's decision Yeah. Which is which is good. Superintendent and designee shall be responsible for developing administrative
regulations
in furtherance of this policy. As Taylor said, should something change,
then we would adjust accordingly.
And this meets all of the guidelines.
This
>> is just the first read. Yep. So again next month, you
know, we'll have Shannon's notes on there, and we'll be able to give you in our packet the agenda
for next month's meeting. Yeah. You do. Something else. Yep. Okay. That'd fine. Alright.
>> Well, thank you for working on it. Appreciate it. We'll
put it on the agenda for next month. Alright.
We already talked about the transfers. Alright.
Liaison roles.
So I know at the last meeting,
I believe we had Steve, you had given us yours,
And I believe the curriculum
yeah. Was it Jerry, you had no issues or anything with with those. And, Mike, Shannon just handed out her
policy liaison
summary. And then
at the last meeting, we had talked about community relations and communications is really one and the same. So putting that two together
and
Caitlin put together a summary of that.
So at this point,
I know we don't have all of them in in in front of us. We just have what Shannon handed out and what Caitlin handed out.
I know, Steve, you had yours from from last time.
>> Oh, I brought in the ones from. Oh, you did? I didn't. Yeah.
>> So I don't know. Because we don't have them I don't does anybody have any issues with what was put in front of us by Caitlin and by, Shannon? Does anybody have any any comments from last month already have. Yeah. Or any comments?
>> Do you think that we could put so because the stuff from last month, like, I kind of summarized,
do you think we could put them all together maybe and then send it out and then everyone can in Yep. That's what I was gonna that's what I was gonna suggest.
>> So so what what I'll do is I'll do that. I'll put together yours. I'll put together what you sent today, Caitlin,
what you handed in, Shannon. Okay. You don't have digital. Why I why don't I send it to you as a Word document? Yeah. That would be great. That would be great because I have yours. Do you have to use digitally?
Yes. You had sent it. Yes. He had it on fancy paper. He did have it on fancy paper, but I do have it. I have and look at that. And
>> I ran out of that fancy paper. Printed out the kids' picture. And I think you had sent around
>> the curriculum on that. Okay. So what I'll do is I will just put it all yeah. I'll just put it all together in one. I'll send it out to all of you, and then we'll just put it on the agenda for May, and we'll we'll approve
the the summary, the the role. Attribute at this point, I think, of voting on the plan. Yep. Yeah. Get it approved and get it time. Yep. Yep. Okay. Thank you everyone for for for for working on it. I think it's important going forward because,
you know,
we'll have new members. And if they get designated in these roles, it's important for them to have an understanding of what it is they're gonna do. So so I will take care of doing that, and then let's put that on the agenda for to vote on them. So
so let's meant to ask.
>> I don't know. Last minute, just going over the minutes and stuff. You were gonna report on
>> the BOS and BOS meetings? Nope. Thank you very much for bringing that up. I I attended I well, I didn't in real time, I watched all of them. A
lot of it obviously had to do with budgets. Yep. I presented our budget during one of the board of finance meetings.
And, again, it really surrounded a lot about the budgets,
but that basically was the majority of what those meetings were were talk were were discussed.
I know, Steve, you have April. So I'll be doing my summary next month. Right? Yes, sir. Yep. And I believe
Brie has May, I believe. No. Mike, you have May. Okay. Thank you. And then Brie is June. Shannon, you're July.
>> August is Jerry, and then I'll wrap up with September because I know that that's I I can do one. I just Okay. I'm gone for a weekend September. That's fine. Oh, sorry about it. Sorry about it. We'll we'll figure it out. We got time. I was
not here when you guys skipped those months.
No. You're good. Yes. It's not my problem.
Okay.
>> Thank you for reminding me, Shannon. I appreciate that. We probably wanna add it to the agenda maybe.
>> If we're gonna have this every month. Yeah. Absolutely. Yep. Okay. Yep. That makes sense. So we can reports.
We could put it under
>> After liaison reports. I was just gonna say, yeah, maybe
after liaison reports, we could talk about that. Okay.
Alright.
Comments from the public?
Jen McBaldrick?
>> I am all set. Thank you. You're welcome. How about Jenny Morell?
Nothing for me. Thank you. Nope. Melissa Liteska?
>> I'm good. Thank you.
Great.
Any other action items?
No? Okay. So
for our next
items for the next meeting, we're gonna talk about the liaison
roles
and vote on them.
We'll hopefully have maybe another presentation
from some students. Okay? And we'll do that under celebration.
>> Can we can we
change
so that that goes
up to number two?
Yeah. On the agenda.
>> Right. And I think sometimes too you know, I won't guarantee there'll be live humans here every month, but sometimes it might be videos or Okay. Teacher might come for something. Yeah. Yeah. We certainly Yeah. But I feel like if we just move it in the agenda, that way if it is a live person, they can not have to Who's the thing here? To a not alive. Yeah. I know. I know it's a better way to phrase that. Okay.
>> So we're gonna vote on the liaison roles, and the summaries will vote on them. Hopefully, we'll have a presentation from some students.
Anything else? What was the capital
>> Yep. The capital policy. Yep. Up update on
well, hopefully, you have it. Well, I okay. Have it. Yep.
So at least Capital.
Okay. Yep. An update on the the MEP.
>> Mhmm. Right. I I would like to know about a $103,000.
Okay. Exactly what, Jared? I'd like to know exactly if what's going on. Are we that we designating
it to go? Okay. And also like to know if we're gonna pay for the MEP. Are they gonna pay for the MEP? Well I'd like to know if we have a definition for CIP and versus
regular repairs.
K.
>> And then we have the second reading of vote on the two policies.
>> Sorry. And on the capital, the the thing we also talked about last meeting that didn't get to this meeting was we need to start creating
a plan on how we
What is the What we're seeing? Our our capital improvements.
>> So and with that, though, actually, when we go over the liaison outlined, I
but as far as part of the facilities
liaison,
that was kind of they should be working with superintendent and
maintenance people to kinda create that and then present it to the board so it's not taken up you know, we're not sitting here at board meetings.
Okay.
>> So if that gets approved, essentially, I guess, it'll be my problem.
>> Does anybody have anything else? Yes. Steve's birthday is Friday. Happy birthday, Steve. Birthday, We will have cupcakes as soon as we're not recorded so people can't see the evidence.
>> There
was something in the chat. Was that just Dawn saying that she could hear? Okay. Just just wanted to make sure. Yeah. I can double check it. But Okay. And our our regular board next board meeting is May 8.
Can I have a motion to cancel? Workshop.
Second. Second.
Third.
All in favor? Aye.
Alright. 909. 909.
Alright. Beautiful.
And, Michael and Taylor, there is the